week 5 & 6 update (#180)
aiidateam/aiida-website: src/blog/gsoc-2026-aiida-natural-language.md

Reviewer: Please also update the header in this file to the current date.

Author: ok

Reviewer: Ah, sorry, I forgot that we actually kept this at the original date. I reverted it. Sorry for the noise!

---
title: "Teaching AiiDA to Speak Human: GSoC 2026 Journey Begins"

> date: 2026-07-07

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2026-05-26
```

As with the MCP tools in the last update, this went through the same close back-and-forth with the mentor: branch, pull request, detailed review, revisions, merge.
By the end of these two weeks the Analysis Agent could do both halves of its job in one conversation, pulling facts from the provenance graph through the MCP tools and explanations from the documentation through RAG, end to end, reviewed, and running.

---

## Weeks 5 & 6: closing the write path and hardening the infrastructure

With the Analysis Agent reading reliably from the provenance graph, the natural next step was closing the other half of the loop: letting it write.
Not freely, and not without a safeguard, but write nonetheless.

### The write path and human confirmation

The core deliverable for these two weeks was `submit_workflow`, a tool that takes an entry point and a set of inputs, validates them, and submits a calculation or workflow to AiiDA.
The validation step matters more than it might seem.
The agent resolves the user's natural language inputs into AiiDA node references, but the model can hallucinate, pass wrong types, or omit required ports entirely.

> Rather than letting a bad submission reach the database, `_prepare_submission` runs AiiDA's own `pre_process` and `validate` on the resolved inputs first, catching structural errors before the user is ever asked.

Reviewer: Not sure it adds any value to mention the (private) function names. Maybe:

```suggestion
Rather than letting a bad submission reach the database, the resolved inputs are first validated against the process's own input spec, exactly as AiiDA would at submit time, catching structural errors before the user is ever asked.
```

The human confirmation step was the other non-negotiable piece.
Every submission the agent proposes pauses the run and surfaces a preview, showing the resolved entry point and the actual node types the agent is about to write, not the raw arguments it was given.
The user sees `InstalledCode(pk=1)` and `Int(value=5)`, not `{"code": {"pk": 1}, "x": 5}`.
Only an explicit `y` proceeds.
This is enforced structurally: `submit_workflow` is registered with `requires_approval=True`, so pydantic-ai returns a `DeferredToolRequests` object before executing anything.
There is no code path that writes to the database without passing through that gate.
A regression test proves it.

One subtlety surfaced during dogfooding.

> AiiDA fills certain port defaults at submit time, for example `metadata.options.resources` defaults to `{num_machines: 1}` on a local profile.

Reviewer: These defaults are actually defined elsewhere (as I myself just learned while reviewing):
```suggestion
Each calculation plugin declares defaults for its optional ports in its own process spec (its `define()` method), and `pre_process` fills them in.
`core.arithmetic.add`, for example, sets a default `metadata.options.resources` of `{num_machines: 1, num_mpiprocs_per_machine: 1}`, so the user never has to spell it out.
```

Validating before `pre_process` was stricter than the engine itself, rejecting submissions that AiiDA would have happily accepted and forcing the user to spell out boilerplate options by hand.

> The fix was running `pre_process` on a copy of the inputs first, so validation sees the same picture the engine does, without mutating what the preview shows.

Reviewer: Maybe clearer:
```suggestion
The fix was to fill in those defaults before validating, the same way the engine does at submit time, so the check sees the user's inputs together with AiiDA's own defaults rather than the bare inputs alone.
```

A second issue came from AiiDA's thread model.
The approval preview bound the default user and node objects to the main thread session.
pydantic-ai executes sync tools on a worker thread, so re-running the agent after approval to trigger the actual write raised a cross-thread SQLAlchemy error.

> The fix was extracting `_run_submission` and calling it from `_handle_deferred` on the main thread directly after confirmation, keeping the worker thread entirely away from any database write.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A second issue came from SQLAlchemy's session-per-thread model, which AiiDA's storage backend uses: each thread gets its own database session, and an ORM object is tied to the session that loaded it.
Building the approval preview resolves the agent's inputs into AiiDA nodes on the main thread, binding those objects (the default user, the resolved input nodes) to the main thread's session.
The first design then performed the write by re-running the agent, but pydantic-ai runs sync tools on a worker thread, so reusing those main-thread objects from the worker thread raised a cross-thread SQLAlchemy error.
The fix was to run the confirmed submission directly on the main thread, right after the user approves, so the worker thread never touches the database at all.
```

Two configuration gaps were fixed alongside this.
The `max_tokens` setting had no way to be controlled from the environment, which meant long tool-calling runs could be silently truncated.
A `context_length` knob was added for Ollama specifically, sent as `num_ctx` per request so the context window is opt-in rather than a hidden default.
Both live in `ModelSettings` and are validated against each other at startup, so a budget that cannot fit inside its own window fails fast with a clear message rather than silently misbehaving mid-run.

The REPL also got a proper overhaul.
The bare `input()` loop was replaced with `prompt_toolkit`, giving the session persistent history across restarts via an XDG-compliant file, arrow-key and `Ctrl-R` recall, real multiline editing, and emacs-style line keys.
The `rich` library replaced the hand-rolled threading spinner.
History is now capped on turn boundaries rather than raw message count, which matters because slicing mid-turn orphans a tool call that providers then reject.
The mentor updated the README with a demo of the current state.

> ### Cloud model access

Reviewer: Maybe also add an introductory sentence here, motivating why we are diverging from the original plan of local-only. We do have it in the last sentence, but as it is now, it just reads like "welp, we added OpenRouter", but without a motivation.

Towards the end of these two weeks, OpenRouter support landed as a first-class provider, sitting alongside Ollama, OpenAI, and Anthropic in the model factory.
One API key gives access to a wide range of models without managing separate credentials, which makes it much easier to test the agent against capable cloud models rather than being limited to what runs locally.

> The difference in response quality and latency is substantial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We found the difference to be substantial: small local models give poor answers, large local models are slow to respond. In contrast, a capable cloud model is both accurate and fast.
```
